website/docs/HTML_LEGEND_IMPLEMENTATION.md, before:

# HTML Legend Implementation Summary

## Overview

This document summarizes the comprehensive implementation of the HTML legend feature for the Mountain Taxes application, replacing the default Chart.js canvas legend with a custom HTML legend positioned at the bottom-start.

## Implementation Details

### 1. Core Components Added

#### `website/src/htmlLegend.ts`
- **Purpose**: Custom HTML legend component with accessibility features
- **Key Features**:
  - Bottom-start positioning as specified
  - **Shows all 50 states by default** with visual distinction between selected and unselected
  - **Bootstrap button styling**: `btn-secondary` for unselected, `btn-outline-secondary` for selected states
  - Interactive legend items for dataset visibility toggling and state selection
  - Keyboard navigation support (Enter/Space keys)
  - Visual distinction between selected and unselected states using Bootstrap classes
  - Error handling for chart integration failures
  - Responsive design with mobile optimizations

#### Updated `website/src/chartComponent.ts`
- **Changes**:
  - Disabled default Chart.js legend (`display: false`)
  - Added `generateLegendItems()` method for HTML legend data
  - Added `toggleDatasetVisibility()` method for legend interactions
  - Added `onLegendUpdate()` callback registration
  - Added `triggerLegendUpdate()` for automatic legend updates

#### Updated `website/src/main.ts`
- **Changes**:
  - Added HTML legend initialization in component setup
  - Updated layout to include legend container below chart
  - Added getter method for HTML legend instance

### 2. Type Definitions Added

#### `website/src/types.ts`
```typescript
export interface LegendItem {
    label: string;
    color: string;
    hidden: boolean;
    datasetIndex: number;
    isSelected?: boolean;  // NEW: Indicates if state is currently selected
}

export interface HtmlLegendConfig {
    containerId: string;
    position: 'bottom-start' | 'bottom-center' | 'bottom-end' | 'top-start' | 'top-center' | 'top-end';
    showTitle: boolean;
    titleText?: string;
}
```

### 3. Styling Implementation

#### `website/index.html`
- **Bootstrap Button Integration**:
  - **Unselected states**: Use `btn btn-secondary` classes for consistent Bootstrap styling
  - **Selected states**: Use `btn btn-outline-secondary` classes to show selection state
  - **Hidden states**: Additional `.legend-item-hidden` class for reduced opacity
- **Added CSS Classes**:
  - `.html-legend-container`: Main legend container with background and border
  - `.legend-items`: Flexbox layout for legend items
  - `.legend-item`: Base legend item styling that works with Bootstrap button classes
  - `.legend-item-hidden`: Styling for hidden datasets (reduced opacity)
  - `.legend-color-box`: Color indicator for each dataset
  - `.legend-label`: Text styling for state names
  - **Responsive breakpoints**: Mobile-optimized sizing for different screen sizes

### 4. Accessibility Features

- **Keyboard Navigation**: Full keyboard support with Enter/Space key handling
- **ARIA Attributes**: Proper `role`, `tabindex`, and `aria-label` attributes
- **Screen Reader Support**: Descriptive labels indicating state selection status and actions
- **Focus Management**: Visible focus indicators and proper tab order
- **State Indication**: Clear visual and textual indication of selected vs. unselected states

### 5. Integration Points

#### Chart Component Integration
- Legend updates automatically when datasets are added/removed
- Bidirectional communication between chart and legend
- Error handling for Chart.js API compatibility issues

#### State Selector Integration
- Legend reflects current state selection
- Clicking legend items toggles dataset visibility
- Consistent color scheme across components

### 6. Testing Coverage

#### `website/tests/htmlLegend.test.ts`
- **Test Categories**:
  - Constructor and initialization
  - Legend rendering with various data states
  - User interactions (click and keyboard)
  - Chart integration callbacks
  - Component lifecycle management
  - Responsive design configurations
  - Error handling scenarios

#### Updated Existing Tests
- **Chart Component Tests**: Added HTML legend integration tests
- **Integration Tests**: Added end-to-end legend functionality tests
- **Main Application Tests**: Added HTML legend component initialization tests

### 7. Documentation Updates

#### README Files
- **Root README.md**: Added HTML legend feature to feature list
- **Website README.md**: Updated with accessibility and legend information

#### Integration Summary
- **INTEGRATION_SUMMARY.md**: Updated with HTML legend component details

## Technical Specifications

### Positioning
- **Location**: Bottom-start as specified in Chart.js documentation
- **Layout**: Flexbox with responsive wrapping
- **Spacing**: Consistent gap and padding for optimal readability

### Accessibility Compliance
- **WCAG 2.1 AA**: Meets accessibility guidelines
- **Keyboard Navigation**: Full keyboard support
- **Screen Readers**: Proper semantic markup and ARIA attributes
- **Color Contrast**: Sufficient contrast ratios for all text elements

### Performance Considerations
- **Efficient Updates**: Only re-renders when chart data changes
- **Memory Management**: Proper cleanup on component destruction
- **Event Handling**: Optimized event listeners with proper cleanup

### Browser Compatibility
- **Modern Browsers**: Full support for ES2020+ features
- **Mobile Devices**: Responsive design with touch-friendly interactions
- **Accessibility Tools**: Compatible with screen readers and keyboard navigation

## Validation Results

### ✅ All Tests Passing
- **Total Tests**: 202 tests
- **Success Rate**: 100% (0 failures)
- **Coverage**: All new functionality covered

### ✅ TypeScript Compilation
- **Type Safety**: All types properly defined and used
- **No Type Errors**: Clean compilation with strict type checking

### ✅ Accessibility Compliance
- **Keyboard Navigation**: Full keyboard support implemented
- **ARIA Attributes**: Proper semantic markup
- **Screen Reader Support**: Descriptive labels and roles

### ✅ Responsive Design
- **Mobile Optimization**: Proper scaling for small screens
- **Touch Interactions**: Touch-friendly legend items
- **Flexible Layout**: Adapts to different container sizes

## Conclusion

The HTML legend implementation successfully replaces the default Chart.js legend with a more accessible, customizable, and user-friendly solution. The implementation follows Chart.js best practices, maintains full accessibility compliance, and integrates seamlessly with the existing Mountain Taxes application architecture.

**Key Benefits Achieved**:
- Better accessibility with keyboard navigation and screen reader support
- Improved styling control and responsive design
- Enhanced user experience with interactive legend items
- Consistent integration with existing application components
- Comprehensive test coverage ensuring reliability and maintainability

Commit message:

HTML Legend Bug Fix (December 2024)

website/docs/HTML_LEGEND_IMPLEMENTATION.md, after:

# HTML Legend Implementation Summary

## Overview

This document summarizes the comprehensive implementation of the HTML legend feature for the Mountain Taxes application, replacing the default Chart.js canvas legend with a custom HTML legend positioned at the bottom-start.

## Implementation Details

### 1. Core Components Added

#### `website/src/htmlLegend.ts`
- **Purpose**: Custom HTML legend component with accessibility features
- **Key Features**:
  - Bottom-start positioning as specified
  - **Shows all 50 states by default** with visual distinction between selected and unselected
  - **Bootstrap button styling**: `btn-secondary` for unselected, `btn-outline-secondary` for selected states
  - Interactive legend items for complete state management (add/remove states from chart)
  - Keyboard navigation support (Enter/Space keys)
  - Visual distinction between selected and unselected states using Bootstrap classes
  - Error handling for chart integration failures
  - Responsive design with mobile optimizations

#### Updated `website/src/chartComponent.ts`
- **Changes**:
  - Disabled default Chart.js legend (`display: false`)
  - Added `generateLegendItems()` method for HTML legend data
  - Added `toggleDatasetVisibility()` method for legend interactions
  - Added `onLegendUpdate()` callback registration
  - Added `triggerLegendUpdate()` for automatic legend updates

#### Updated `website/src/main.ts`
- **Changes**:
  - Added HTML legend initialization in component setup
  - Updated layout to include legend container below chart
  - Added getter method for HTML legend instance

### 2. Type Definitions Added

#### `website/src/types.ts`
```typescript
export interface LegendItem {
    label: string;
    color: string;
    hidden: boolean;
    datasetIndex: number;
    isSelected?: boolean;  // NEW: Indicates if state is currently selected
}

export interface HtmlLegendConfig {
    containerId: string;
    position: 'bottom-start' | 'bottom-center' | 'bottom-end' | 'top-start' | 'top-center' | 'top-end';
    showTitle: boolean;
    titleText?: string;
}
```

### 3. Styling Implementation

#### `website/index.html`
- **Bootstrap Button Integration**:
  - **Unselected states**: Use `btn btn-secondary` classes for consistent Bootstrap styling
  - **Selected states**: Use `btn btn-outline-secondary` classes to show selection state
  - **Hidden states**: Additional `.legend-item-hidden` class for reduced opacity
- **Added CSS Classes**:
  - `.html-legend-container`: Main legend container with background and border
  - `.legend-items`: Flexbox layout for legend items
  - `.legend-item`: Base legend item styling that works with Bootstrap button classes
  - `.legend-item-hidden`: Styling for hidden datasets (reduced opacity)
  - `.legend-color-box`: Color indicator for each dataset
  - `.legend-label`: Text styling for state names
  - **Responsive breakpoints**: Mobile-optimized sizing for different screen sizes

### 4. Accessibility Features

- **Keyboard Navigation**: Full keyboard support with Enter/Space key handling
- **ARIA Attributes**: Proper `role`, `tabindex`, and `aria-label` attributes
- **Screen Reader Support**: Descriptive labels indicating state selection status and actions
- **Focus Management**: Visible focus indicators and proper tab order
- **State Indication**: Clear visual and textual indication of selected vs. unselected states

### 5. Integration Points

#### Chart Component Integration
- Legend updates automatically when datasets are added/removed
- Bidirectional communication between chart and legend
- Error handling for Chart.js API compatibility issues

#### State Selector Integration
- Legend reflects current state selection
- Clicking legend items toggles dataset visibility
- Consistent color scheme across components

### 6. Testing Coverage

#### `website/tests/htmlLegend.test.ts`
- **Test Categories**:
  - Constructor and initialization
  - Legend rendering with various data states
  - User interactions (click and keyboard)
  - Chart integration callbacks
  - Component lifecycle management
  - Responsive design configurations
  - Error handling scenarios

#### Updated Existing Tests
- **Chart Component Tests**: Added HTML legend integration tests
- **Integration Tests**: Added end-to-end legend functionality tests
- **Main Application Tests**: Added HTML legend component initialization tests

### 7. Documentation Updates

#### README Files
- **Root README.md**: Added HTML legend feature to feature list
- **Website README.md**: Updated with accessibility and legend information

#### Integration Summary
- **INTEGRATION_SUMMARY.md**: Updated with HTML legend component details

## Technical Specifications

### Positioning
- **Location**: Bottom-start as specified in Chart.js documentation
- **Layout**: Flexbox with responsive wrapping
- **Spacing**: Consistent gap and padding for optimal readability

### Accessibility Compliance
- **WCAG 2.1 AA**: Meets accessibility guidelines
- **Keyboard Navigation**: Full keyboard support
- **Screen Readers**: Proper semantic markup and ARIA attributes
- **Color Contrast**: Sufficient contrast ratios for all text elements

### Performance Considerations
- **Efficient Updates**: Only re-renders when chart data changes
- **Memory Management**: Proper cleanup on component destruction
- **Event Handling**: Optimized event listeners with proper cleanup

### Browser Compatibility
- **Modern Browsers**: Full support for ES2020+ features
- **Mobile Devices**: Responsive design with touch-friendly interactions
- **Accessibility Tools**: Compatible with screen readers and keyboard navigation

## Validation Results

### ✅ All Tests Passing
- **Total Tests**: 202 tests
- **Success Rate**: 100% (0 failures)
- **Coverage**: All new functionality covered

### ✅ TypeScript Compilation
- **Type Safety**: All types properly defined and used
- **No Type Errors**: Clean compilation with strict type checking

### ✅ Accessibility Compliance
- **Keyboard Navigation**: Full keyboard support implemented
- **ARIA Attributes**: Proper semantic markup
- **Screen Reader Support**: Descriptive labels and roles

### ✅ Responsive Design
- **Mobile Optimization**: Proper scaling for small screens
- **Touch Interactions**: Touch-friendly legend items
- **Flexible Layout**: Adapts to different container sizes

## Bug Fixes

### Legend Button State Update Issue (Fixed - December 2024)
- **Issue**: When clicking on a selected state in the legend to unselect it, the button visual state would not update properly from `btn-outline-secondary` back to `btn-secondary`
- **Root Cause**: Race conditions between multiple legend update calls and timing conflicts. The event handler was making manual `setTimeout` calls that competed with the chart's automatic callback mechanism
- **Investigation**: Multiple approaches were attempted including changing from `toggleDatasetVisibility()` to `removeState()`, adding explicit legend refresh calls, and modifying timing mechanisms
- **Final Solution**: Simplified the event handler to rely solely on the chart's callback mechanism. Removed all manual `setTimeout` calls and let the chart's `triggerLegendUpdate()` method handle timing automatically
- **Implementation**: Event handler now simply calls `chart.addState()` or `chart.removeState()` and trusts the chart's callback system to update the legend at the correct time
- **Verification**: Created comprehensive browser test files (`test-fix.html`, `minimal-test.html`) to verify the fix works in real browser environments, not just unit tests
- **Impact**: Legend buttons now correctly and reliably toggle between `btn-outline-secondary` (selected) and `btn-secondary` (unselected) states without timing issues

## Conclusion

The HTML legend implementation successfully replaces the default Chart.js legend with a more accessible, customizable, and user-friendly solution. The implementation follows Chart.js best practices, maintains full accessibility compliance, and integrates seamlessly with the existing Mountain Taxes application architecture.

**Key Benefits Achieved**:
- Better accessibility with keyboard navigation and screen reader support
- Improved styling control and responsive design
- Enhanced user experience with interactive legend items
- Consistent integration with existing application components
- Comprehensive test coverage ensuring reliability and maintainability
